As-salamu-alaikum warahmatullahi
wabarakatuh and welcome to another
episode of the MH podcast, one of the
most irregular podcasts in history.
We're we're joined with a very special
guest. She's the author of 25
books. She specializes in many issues to
do with uh
could we say
pastoral issues relating to women? She's
actually even started a magazine. One of
the first to actually have
a woman's voice in the Muslim community
called The Sister Magazine. Is that
correct? Is that all right?
Yeah, we ran it for 10 years, mashallah.
So, we don't print any more, but yeah,
yeah, we we did it for 10 years.
and now she continues to to train and
mentor people and on how to to write and
she has all courses running, which I'm
sure sure you'll be able to see on her
socials. So, let's start off Sister
Na'ima.
What kind of issues have you been kind
of trying to help sisters with
in the Muslim community? What have you
found have been to be the salient
issues, problematic issues for women in
the in the Muslim community such that
especially male members need to pay
attention to?
[snorts]
Oh, okay. I think I had an answer for
the first part of the question and the
second part made me think and made me
pause.
I think what we see within our space in
terms of what sisters struggle with is a
lot of mental barriers.
I would say that many, many sisters
suffer from
a sort of victimhood
or some kind of
imprisonment of the mind more than a lot
of other things. Why I say that is
because lots of us don't realize really
how powerful our own mindset is in
determining how we feel about our lives,
how we feel about our marriages, about
our children, about our prospects. A lot
of that is actually what's happening in
your mind, right? Not necessarily what's
happening on the ground. So, the work
that I do is geared towards helping
sisters and general in people in general
understand the power of their own
mindset and taking back control of that
which they can control.
And you know, we call it women's
empowerment and we've had this
conversation before where you know,
people are wondering, well, what kind of
empowerment are you actually talking
about? For me, the most potent form of
power is self-control. Is
self-awareness. Is you know, being able
to navigate your own mind and being able
to regulate yourself. And that's a skill
that we don't teach children. We don't
teach it to young people. We don't teach
it to men or women. So, that's really
the work that I do, subhanallah. What is
the What are some of those barriers that
you speak of? You said you mentioned
some mental barriers that women in the
community have.
From your experience,
what are some of those barriers?
I would say when I've spoken with
sisters and when I've worked with
sisters, the predominantly women come to
me because they feel that something's
missing, okay?
They lack confidence in themselves.
There is a sense of you know, failure
about their lives wherever they are,
whether they're single, married, whether
they have children or the children have
left the nest. There's this sense that
they are not good enough, that they're
not worthy, that they're failing
somehow.
And you know, that's a really powerful
lens to to look at your life with, the
lens of failure. Because if you're
looking at your life through the lens of
failure, guess what? You're going to
find failure everywhere, right? If
you're looking at your life through the
lens of you know,
I'm not good enough or I'm not good as
as good as so-and-so, that's what you're
going to see replicated time and time
again. And this is for men and women,
you know, way that we see ourselves
impacts directly our experience of of of
life, of everything that's happening
around us. So, you know, for for me,
empowering sisters is helping them to
show up, you know, like I talk about, to
show up fully for the lives that Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala has chosen for them.
And every single one of us Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala has picked a path
for us.
And that's the path that matters. Not
your sister's path or your cousin's or
your sister-in-law or anyone else, but
the path that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has put you on, your responsibilities,
the people who count on you, your
opportunities, your challenges.
The more you focus on living your life
intentionally and showing up to every
one of those challenges, the more
satisfying your life will be to be
honest and the more fulfilled you'll be
in the life you have right now. And that
for me is is is golden because it makes
everything easier.
What are some of the women-specific
issues? Because a lot of what you said
there could like you've kind of alluded
to Yeah. equally apply to males and
females. So, what are some of the
women-specific issues which through our
own paradigm, like obviously
uh
this whole conversation, we're going to
assume the Islamic paradigm here, but
let's let's for the sake of argument say
through our own paradigm
that women have concerns with, that
legitimate concerns which we all need to
be aware of, we all need to
to to to to aid and helping them with
and that we need to have empathy on.
I would say the topic that comes up the
most
in general is and not surprisingly is
relationships
is and specifically marriage and then
everything that kind of radiates
outwards from a marriage. Whether it's
in-laws, whether it's children, whether
it's stepchildren, whether it's looking
to get married, whether it's healing
from a divorce. A lot of the problems
that we're seeing in the community do
kind of revolve around that relationship
between a man and a woman. And certainly
over the years, that's the area in which
I've seen the most dysfunction in our
community.
That's where I've seen the most damage
being caused, the most pain being
inflicted kind of both ways. And of
course, the fallout is our children.
And what they see growing up and what
they either want to replicate or don't
want to replicate. So, I would say
if we could
get our marriages on point, so many
things would change. So many issues that
we're having with the children, with the
youth, with mental health, with even
poverty and things like that, so many of
those issues would cease to be an issue
if those fundamental relationships were
healed and were healthy.
Because two healthy people,
you know, bringing up a family, that's
the unit that we're you know, that
that's the unit that we are striving to
create. But when there is unrest, when
there is dysfunction, when there is pain
in that central relationship, it again
radiates outward to everything. So, like
I said, all of the issues surrounding a
marriage
on on the front the beginning of it, the
end of it and in the in the in between,
those those are all the issues that I
see still are issues for our sisters a
good 20 years later. So, I've been
Muslim for 20 years.
Over 20 years now, mashallah. And it's
still the same stuff. And sometimes,
subhanallah, I'm actually surprised
because I remember when I was deep in
the community, I was living in a certain
community and it was rough. It was
rough. The
the situations that sisters were in, the
the kind of conditions under which they
were kind of operating,
it was it was tough. It was tough to
witness. It was tough to try to support
someone through that process knowing
that there was actually very little you
could do. And it's it's just it's kind
of dismaying to me to see that we still
haven't figured it out. We're still
having some of those same issues and
sometimes even more now because new
issues have come up to basically attack
that unit of the family.
What are some of those issues in
particular that
we could say
constitute patterns, continuities
um
Like let me let me give you one example.
Let's give one example, right? And let's
let's put it out there.
The idea of an absent father.
Okay, an idea of an absent father. Now,
you as you say, you kind of counsel
women, you speak to them, you yourself
for the single mother book for
completely different reasons which you
intimate in your book uh
which I'm going to get wrong.
Let's say how do you Show up. Show up,
yeah.
Show up. Show up is a which we recommend
that you get. It's a very powerful
uh but just looking at the first kind of
20, 30 pages is you know,
uh [snorts] so emotional. So well
written and it's amazing how you
articulate yourself. But putting that to
the side,
how
you how can we how can we frame the idea
of the problems that are caused by an
absent father
uh in the community? What have you seen
with your with your clients, with your
colleagues, with your friends?
What kind of damage does that cause?
I would say that you know, the for me
the most shocking thing that I've
observed over the years is
the seeming and again, this is anecdotal
because I'm not a social scientist. I
haven't got the data. Your anecdotes are
important to us, Na'ima. Your anecdotes
are important.
Well, that's what you're going to get.
That's what you're going to get.
Your honestly, your experiences are very
important especially as we know, there
is a dearth or a non-existence in some
cases of some of this kind of data
especially within the Muslim community.
So, your your experience are very
important.
I think for me, I've I've been very
vocal about this on social media. You
know, my video's all over Instagram and
whatever, but for me, the most shocking
thing that I've seen in this area is
when there is a divorce and the father
is basically he's gone. He's left he's
left the marriage. He's left the wife
and he's left the kids. And I don't
understand the thinking behind that
because I know so many sisters who when
there's a divorce they are literally on
their own. So they are not only
responsible for the children on a
day-to-day basis but they are
responsible for them economically,
socially, in terms of school, in terms
of everything. The father is is he's
out. He's out. And I I I've said this
before.
We really really need to start thinking
so much more carefully and being so much
more intentional when we start families
because as I have said before
the children pay the price. And that
trauma that we are that we are living
through our broken homes, our children
are carrying that trauma and they will
carry it into their families as well. So
I I've I can think of a particular
situation where you know the father was
around, he was working, he was a
breadwinner
and the divorce was was not amicable at
all. It was a very very difficult
divorce but it was one of those where it
was like this cannot continue. When he
left the home he stopped speaking to the
children completely. Cut off from them
completely. They would ring him, he
wouldn't pick up. They would leave voice
messages It's really dis- to be honest
this kind of thing Naima sorry to chime
in here but
this kind of thing really does make me
sick because it's I think if anything it
exposed the true character of that
person. Like their true colors came out
when that that particular man his true
colors came out when the divorce took
place because if you're willing to
sacrifice your children for something
that's completely no fault of their own
that must mean at least that your love
for yourself
is far exceeds anything else in life.
It's it's
it's like the
ultimate manifestation of narcissism.
Like I'm going to teach everyone a
lesson. I don't care what collateral
damage it is.
Just so that you know they know who I am
and what I'm about.
I think that there is that On a thing
honestly sorry to chime in again. I
think these men should be exposed
honestly like if if in these in the
community if a man is genuinely doing
that to
putting the kids you know in harm's way
in that manner I think that the
community
I don't know if this is a strong stance
in your perspective let me get your
perspective on it but the community the
Imams the his friends should do anything
that by any means necessary to influence
his behavior because that is for me
despicable and deplorable action. I
think he should be boycotted, he should
be
the the hard the hard approach should be
used on him the kind approach but this
kind of person shouldn't shouldn't be
just allowed to live in society normal.
He just left his kids and
I don't know am I having a am I having
an emotional reaction to this or do you
think I'm justified?
No no I I think I think you're
justified. I think we we I I have
observed this over the years and you
know anybody who sees it differently is
free to disagree but what I've seen in
the communities that I've known is that
brothers give each other a pass.
You know whatever you do in your private
life
nothing to do with me. Like that's your
family. Do you know what I mean? Like
I'm not going to step into your
territory. I'm not going to get involved
in some kind of way.
Whatever is happening whatever the case
it could be that there's injustice
happening at home that sister is like
you know it's known in the community
that sister is desperately unhappy or
that he's taken away her rights in some
shape or form or whatever but he's still
a brother and he's still welcome and he
still gets salam and he still has you
know his place in the society because I
don't know whether it's like a is a
thing or a greater thing but for us as
sisters I'll be honest and this is
something that sisters have been saying
for years and years. It's like no one
ever tells the brothers anything.
Anytime that there's advice or khutbahs
or warnings it's always to the sisters.
Sisters fear Allah. Sisters wear hijab.
Sisters do this. Sisters do that. Obey
your husbands. Sisters give him what he
wants. Sisters sisters [laughter]
sisters. And unfortunately we're human
beings. Sisters are doing wrong and
brothers are doing wrong. But what we
don't often hear or see from the the
elders in the community is brothers
actually being pulled up and said you
can't do this. You know whether it's on
a sort of grassroots level person to
person or even from the mimbar to say
brothers ittaqullah. You know this is
not acceptable in our deen and actually
teaching our brothers that I'll just I
just want to make this point. Yes. In
our communities many many times you'll
find that we enable bad behavior
especially amongst men and boys. We
enable it. How do we enable it? By
making excuses for it. By not pulling
them up on it. Domestic violence is a
great example. Okay when there's actual
violence in the home yeah there's
actually violence or there's alcohol
abuse or there's drugs or anything like
that. The family's response is typically
to cover and to shield right? We don't
want to get the police involved. We
don't want the neighbors involved. We
don't want the community involved and if
the woman has the audacity to speak up
she's the one who's shamed. She's the
one who's blamed. How could you
embarrass us like this? You know it's
your fault he did X Y and Z. It's very
easy to blame and shame the woman rather
than actually addressing this issue with
your son and saying in our family this
is not acceptable. So we become a
community of enablers. Okay but before
we move on with this conversation
Yeah sorry sorry Naima sorry to chime in
here.
Before we move on the issue here is when
we use terms like domestic violence
you know um
I told you I think before we started the
show that I wrote a small little
pamphlet book uh which was really the
combination combined effort of my
postgraduate essays that I'd done on
gender studies. Um anyway one of the
most about domestic violence and what I
found was problematic there was a
particular woman
who wrote a definition for what domestic
violence is.
Her name is Kumussay. I think I'm
correctly spell- pronouncing her name.
And she said something to the effect of
and I'm paraphrasing but this is it's in
my book if someone wants to see.
Um that domestic violence is um
is defined as is defined as when one
spouse um
you know abu- abuse of one spouse to
another or violence violence of one
spouse to another.
Uh usually and this is exactly what she
said in her definition usually from a
man to a woman yeah. Ooh wow. Any any
any any social sciences will tell you
this is a problem because it it begs the
question in a sense it's kind of assumed
the answer of the question before it
started it. So you couldn't put the
results like the hypothesis and the
conclusion should be two different
things.
Uh the issue with the terms like
domestic violence and and rape and and
these kinds of terms
is what whose definition are we really
using? Are we using the definition of
Kumussay who's already put her
conclusion in her hypothesis? Are we
using the definition of McKinnon who
defines rape as sexual intercourse any
sexual intercourse even with
Catherine McKinnon says that it's rape
it's even with consent.
Uh so
the issue with using these terms and
especially sometimes the legal
definitions are so vague. What what are
the definitions of abuse?
Like for example um the you can have
monetary abuse. What does monetary abuse
look like? By not giving her pocket
money enough pocket money? What kind of
pocket money do you need?
What are we talking about?
really like that. It's more you know if
if a person is has money and then they
I'm I'm my issue money from that money.
Naima my issue is when we have these
such wide definitions of these things
right? Yeah. As so you say well she's
been raped. And what he means by
McKinnon's definition being raped means
someone had sex with her. But on some on
the governmental definition is the
insertion of the penis or whatever it
may be. By the way rape on the UK law
can only be done by a man to a woman. It
is discriminatory by Really?
there's no such thing as rape.
A woman it can she can sexually assault
a man but she cannot rape a man UK law
for example. But anyway putting that all
to the side even though you can imagine
her sorry sorry to be explicit but she
can put some knife in him or she can put
a bottle in him she can do something.
She can she can sedate him. She
All these things are possible but you
know it's only defined in in that way.
But putting that all to the side the
point is
whoever gets to set the definition
gets to control the narrative. Whoever
gets to control the narrative gets to
call the shots. And and my issue with a
lot of these key terms is that if we
don't have it in the Islamic narrative
and we use these terms like abuse
domestic violence and what's the what
what what all these things then uh it
can easily come in someone can come in
with another agenda and take our
community to a completely different
direction. Would you agree to that or to
what extent would you agree to that?
Um well of course it's plausible but do
you think that's what's happened with
the community?
Do you think that we've been kind of
kind of coerced
Yeah I think there are examples of what
I'll give you one example where I think
maybe we'll both agree right?
One example where we would definitely
both agree is that in the Islamic law
right? We we believe that kin's ties of
kinship should not should be respected.
We talked about the case of the absent
father right?
But there's also the case
absent father yeah. Who has basically
like done a done a runner. Yeah. But
what about the case also of the the
woman who's weaponizing the chil-
children and leveraging them
in after a divorce in order to spite the
father. And that happens a lot so much
so that is I mean organizations like
fathers for justice and these kind of
they have come up. Let me give you a a
real scenario which I think you're aware
of right?
Say for example a man and woman get
separated for whatever reason it may be
yeah.
Man and woman get separated the woman
has custody of the children. She's the
primary custo- custodian of the
children. She takes care of them and so
on.
Now he wants to have access to his
child. So there's they have to arbitrate
they have to go to court family court in
the UK and so on. Yeah. In the meantime,
he can't see his children.
In the meantime, she has she she is
barring him, preventing him, stopping
him from seeing the children. And for
every second that she's stopping him
from seeing the children from Islamic
perspective, she's sinning. Not even
every second, every millisecond. And
she's not just sinning for that, she's
sinning for stopping the extended
family, for example, the man's
the grandparents of the children or the
aunties, the uncles from seeing those
children again, as well.
And you you were talking about and it's
true and I do agree that there is this
kind of culture of
gender bias. It might not be feminism or
red pill or whatever it may be, but it
could be gender bias.
Like where you genuinely people think
that, you know,
he's he's one of one of the guys and
whatever, so I'm not going to say
anything. But I think on the other hand
as well, you do have gender bias from
the from the sisters as well. Like
sometimes she'll see that her friend is
preventing her ex-husband from seeing
the kids.
Her friend will make excuses. Yeah, and
he's not doing it my way, he's not
giving me enough money, whatever it is.
And she will acquiesce to that as well.
Would you agree? Is that happening?
Yeah, I think I I would say I agree. I
think there's a general kind of
opinion that women back each other up.
It's even got a name, it's called girl
code, right, out there in the world.
Where women validate each other, women
back each other up, no matter what,
right? I would say within the Muslim
community, the sisters who don't do that
are the ones who are firmly rooted in
deen. Because when you love someone for
the sake of Allah, it's not about girl
code, it's not about, yeah, you're my
girl and yeah, whatever. It's sis, this
is haram. Exactly.
and I have witnessed those conversations
before and someone has said, you know, I
have been involved in those
conversations say, sis, have you checked
to see whether that is okay? You know,
have you asked anybody about that?
And with something like this,
yeah, sorry to cut you off. Sorry, I'm
cutting up a bit too much here, but
with something like this, you don't need
to check. Like the Prophet Muhammad
said,
you know, that someone who cuts the
kinds of
kinship is not going to go to heaven.
Yeah. So, Yeah.
this is such a like it's a clear thing.
It's
open the Quran, the second or third
page, I don't know.
It's there. The ones who cut the the
ties that Allah
wanted to be maintained and then they
create corruption in the land.
Any will tell you that's not just
you know, your parents and your
grandparents and the extended family,
but it's even your friends and your
neighbors and these kinds of things as
well. So, I mean, imagine someone
stopping their children from seeing a
parent.
That's stopping the child from that is
stopping the child from performing an
obligatory act. That is stopping the
parent from performing an obligatory
act. That is um
that is causing emotional damage to
someone unjustly. That is all of those
things and more.
What do you think about that?
You know, as you're saying all of this,
I'm just thinking of I'm thinking of it
from sort of two angles and I think my
my conclusion is that as as human
beings, we just need to sort it out.
Because just as Okay, so there's one
thing.
This happening to men
because men, especially Muslim men, up
until very recently have not really had
spaces where they have talked about
their lived experience. Mhm.
You know, that the brother is a the
brothers are okay. The brothers are cool
because they have all the power, they
have all the control, they get to do
whatever they want and basically,
they're never the victims. Women are the
victims, sisters are always the victims,
right? So, and I think that is a
narrative in our community, that is a
narrative. Um and I think it's because
sisters will talk about their problems,
sisters have been much more vocal of
late about the issues that they go
through, etc. So, we know what each
other are going through. But brothers
may not speak to each other, but they
certainly have not up until lately
really even speaking honestly about,
hey, you know what?
I'm struggling with this or this has
happened to me and I'm suffering because
of this. So, even in our minds, the idea
of a Muslim man suffering because of a
woman is like, what are you talking
about? That never happens. It's always a
Muslim woman who's suffering because of
a Muslim man. Exactly. It's the it's the
chivalry effect. It is the chivalry
effect. Especially when you hear the
woman like you know, if you if a person,
a judge or an arbitrator or a third
party, another stakeholder of some
sorts, and they literally just see and
hear the woman. Like you just hear and
see the woman crying, it's enough, she
has won already. Like or at least she
has convinced, you know, but if you see
a big man, you know, a huge man with
dominance and especially if he's an
extrovert,
Yes. it's almost like there's no chance
he's got no chance. Are you telling me
that she's oppressing him?
You know, So, this is this is something
that this is something that I want to
just touch on and I hope it's not, you
know, too too open for this audience,
but I'll I'll give you another example.
it's too open for my audience, Naim.
Okay. Yeah. Well,
you know, as I I have two sons and I
have I have three sons and I have two
daughters. Alhamdulillah. And so, when
I'm looking at gender in general, I feel
I have a responsibility to be as
balanced as possible and to be as fair
as possible and to be as just as
possible. So,
just as you're talking about men who are
having their children weaponized, I
can't I cannot say that's not happening.
You know how we always say believe
women? And also we've had many
situations where women have come forward
and said this is happening to us and the
brothers have been like, no. Or the man
or the whoever is like, I know, sister,
you must have done this, you must have
done that. Similarly, I must extend the
same grace to brothers. So, if brothers
come forward and they
look, I haven't seen my kids for 2 years
and I've been trying, but X, Y, Z, we
have to give them the benefit of the
doubt. We have to think that it's
possible that that is true. Just like if
a sister came to me, I would, you know,
I would give her the benefit of the
doubt and say, you know what, sis, I
hear you. Anyway. No, but the burden of
proof Like can I just say something
here? Yeah. The We're not We're not the
brother's not coming forward and saying
the the woman has raped me or she has
the the kind of things that, you know,
require a heavy burden of proof in
Islam. It's she's not coming and saying
that. It's That is the the burden of to
establish a woman is stopping a man from
seeing his children is fairly you could
say fairly simple. All they have to do
is test it out. Come see them on a
Saturday. Are you going to be there or
not? If if if not, why not? Why you not
going to bring the kid? He wants to see
them on Saturday. They want to see him
on Saturday, you know, this is the time
that he is willing to take them. Is that
allowed? Are you allowing this or are
you not allowing this?
All you have to do is basically if you
ask this question, you'll be able to
establish whether the person is barring
the person from So, you don't need four
witnesses for this. It's it's an easy
burden of proof. And so, what I'm saying
is it's it's definitely happening. I
mean, me Sorry, I've
might have said the story before, but me
and Ali Dawah, we went to and he'll
remember this. We went to Sacramento in
California.
And there was a story that stuck with
me. You know, this man who's they were
telling me went to the masjid, you know,
he went to the masjid and
every day and Fajr, I think he they were
saying he goes to Fajr. And then he had
a bad divorce.
And they were telling me that uh
you know, he had his last day with his
daughters. He had two daughters. He had
his last day with them and he couldn't
bear that, you know, the other woman now
she's married another man and that the
courts have all have ruled in her favor.
So, he he done a monstrous act. You
know, he went to the lake and he killed
both of his daughters and he killed
himself. You know, and this is from the
involuntary
I'm not even going to He was responsible
for this. But this this this disgusting
behavior or this this kind of reaction
took place because of an initial
injustice.
Now, two wrongs obviously
cannot make You can never ever justify
something like that, but the truth is we
can avoid these kind of things. Another
situation I heard is a person who's been
prevented from seeing the children
literally died from it. Literally had
panic attacks, seizures until they died
from it.
Why did that happen? Oh, because he had
a secret second wife or something
happened, he went to this country and he
and then the woman found out and she
said you're never going to see your
children again. And few years down the
line, he just he couldn't his health
couldn't handle it and he deteriorated
and died because of a stroke or some
some heart attack or something, which is
related to Now, all I'm saying is these
kind of things, if we're really honest
about it,
could be prevented, but they
I don't know. Tell me if I'm wrong cuz
once again, I'm not a pastoral My
specialism is not
pastoral counseling or something like
this. It's more This is why I've
you know, I'll ask you honestly,
do we not should we not use a really a
sledgehammer approach with this? Like
either if we're talking about the the
absent father
or we're talking about the weaponizing
mother,
Yeah. in either of Should we not really,
you know, should we should we not really
expose these people? Should we not
really um
really
let the community know who these people
are? So that they're unmarriable. They
shouldn't be Cuz if you think about it,
right? If they're capable of not seeing
their children in the case of the absent
father,
they're capable of leaving their kids
alone.
Or they're capable of weaponizing their
kids.
That means that they're capable of
putting their children as human shields
in this proverbial game of leverage.
That means what kind of person are you?
You're a narcissist. You're a bad person
and you And if anyone's going to marry
you, they're going to have a hell of a
life because that means you're only
going to be thinking about yourself. If
you can't even think about your
children, then you can't you will not
think about a partner properly. You will
not you will not be courteous and
compassionate and empathetic. Am I am I
being a bit too emotional with this?
[laughter]
Tell me what
I I as I said before,
the family is the unit, right? And our
families are under extreme pressure. The
family itself is under attack at the
moment. We know this and Muslim families
are just if if not more under attack. We
are just as as as vulnerable. We think
we're not, but we are. And for me,
sledgehammer,
okay, it's a possible approach, but I am
more concerned about us
preparing people for properly for
marriage, for parenthood. We don't We
still don't have enough premarital
counseling. counseling. We don't have
enough therapy and counseling for people
Islam because that man who went and
killed his daughters,
it's not just because his wife wouldn't
let him see and he had a divorce.
Obviously, the man was hurting.
Obviously, he was not okay. So, mental
health, big issue. Counseling within the
marriage, helping people to strengthen
their marriages, to you know, to work on
things, right? To to actually, you know,
if then if they can't work at it, if
they can't make it work, should I say,
then how can we manage the separation?
Because all I care about is the
children. I'll be honest. You too, you
man, you woman, you're adults. Do
whatever you want. You want to have a
secret marriage, go ahead. You want to
have missyar, go ahead. You want to have
four women, you want to marry you know,
three men one after the other, do
whatever you want. But the children,
the children, they are the ones who
experience the fallout and so I I like
the way you tried to balance it there.
You know, you you you gave you gave a
female example
Because [laughter] the reality is we can
all do bad, Muhammad. That's the
reality. We can do bad just by
ourselves, you know? And this this idea
and I might get
Yeah, but but but Naima Naima Because
the the reality is the reality is even
if a woman, for example, let's take
let's assume that the woman does not
have the upper hand. She has the lower
hand, right? The man is over her, her
father is over her, whatever the case
may be, right? Do you think that that
woman does not have power to be evil?
Mhm. Just because she doesn't have the
upper hand? Of course she can. And I'll
tell you where you see it the most.
You're talking about weaponizing the
children. What about wea- weaponizing
intimacy? That's a real thing. Well, let
me Here's Here's what Here's what I'm
going to say. Look, you're talking about
secret second wives. I mean,
if if someone's doing something like
that, I would go and tell them to get
three secret second wives. I mean, to be
honest with you, she's she's Three
secret second wives? Yeah, get three
because I I I know this sounds maybe
harsh or something, but if if a woman is
doing something which is clearly haram,
which is Weaponizing intimacy
specifically.
Weaponizing intimacy. There's a secret
second wife which is
He means not telling the first wife,
which is not even a shot in the nikah.
Cannot even be compared to that in the
least. With all due respect, this is
completely They're two different
uh uh things altogether. So, if she's
not doing it and then he knows that if
he's going to tell her that he's going
to be in polygamy, that she's going to
take his kids and go to another country
or or bar him, then maybe secret second
maybe secret second wives are the way to
go for such people. I mean, they're you
know And now, yeah. What do you think?
Okay, I I I'm I'm not going to go down
on paper saying yes, secret second wives
are a thing. We're not going to say
that.
[laughter]
But but but I think again, my really
what I want to say and the point I want
to make is that we must be careful of
buying into the narrative that only the
dominant party can be evil. Only the
dominant party can oppress. Only the one
who has a level higher can actually do
wrong. And the person who is under is
always right, is always a victim, is
always, you know, basically not to
blame. That's not true, okay? It's not
the fact. And anyway, as we said, you
know, and the thing is again, it's not
something we talk about very often, but
if you if if you start This is This is
I'll just give you a little bit of
background. I have not spoken about
these issues before because up until
last year, I never listened to men
anyway, right? Muslim men didn't really
talk about their own personal issues and
just in general in the culture, the
culture around us is very female. It's
very very female dominated the culture.
I'm not talking about economy, I'm not
talking about politics. I mean the
culture, okay? And it's not only very
female, but it's also very female
centric. So, women's stories dominate.
Women's view of the world now dominate.
Women's ways of emoting, ways of
expressing themselves, they dominate the
culture that we live in, Western
culture, right?
Yes. So, it's very easy to get a feel
for what women like and what women don't
like and how women see the world. That's
very easy. But to find out how men feel
and how men see the world and how men
experience the world has actually been a
lot harder up until a year or two ago,
certainly for me. So, all of this, even
weaponizing intimacy, I would never have
thought it was an issue because I never
heard men talking about it. And of
course, women are not going to talk
about that. Sisters are not going to sit
around saying, "Yeah, it's been three
months Yeah, until I get that car." Or
anything like that. It's not going to
happen, okay? And you know, and to be
honest, you know, in certain places that
might even be applauded like, "Go get
yours, girl." No way.
But um Have you ever heard something
like that, Naima?
among sisters sisters. Not sisters
sisters, you know, but just within
Subhanallah. I've heard I've seen so not
sisters. Is she asexual? This is not She
doesn't She want it herself or
something? Maybe she Maybe she has
lesbian tendencies.
things. [clears throat] There's lots of
different No, brother Muhammad, we're
not going down that road. Come
Why? I mean, three months You turn You
turn and come back. What's going on
three months? What's happening? What do
you She doesn't want it herself? If
everyone's interest Anyone's interested
in in like knowing more about this, you
just have to just search YouTube. And
you will see so many conversations.
three months is a is a very very is a
very big example. We should be talking
about three hours or three days.
like How about How about two years?
How about two years? TWO YEARS?
[laughter]
THE BROTHER MUHAMMAD I'M REALLY SORRY.
SO, what do you expect him to do in that
time?
Maybe you can't imagine it, but maybe
you can't imagine it, but wallahi, this
is the lived reality for some men, some
Muslim men as well.
then the secret second wife
You can't fathom it. very viable
can't fathom it.
But I mean,
I think
No, I I I I think that if, you know, you
are in a situation where, you know,
intimacy is being withheld, okay? For
whatever reason, right? Because
if sharia wise and in general in in in
terms of, you know, marital
relationships
In In sharia, this would be seen as
abuse, by the way.
Yeah, yeah. Of course. Yeah, I mean, it
is seen as
Domestic violence. Domestic abuse.
Probably it is like [laughter] domestic
violence, domestic abuse. But um you
know, you will see that
Oh.
Can you pause, Muhammad? Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, just cut that, please. It's Oh
gosh. Um Am I still on?
Yes, I am.
Yeah. Am I still here?
It's not live. It's not live, by the
way. Okay, cool. Yeah, I know cuz I was
signed out of my account.
Okay, no worries. We'll we'll we'll sort
that out.
here, so that's cool. That's fine.
Okay, but still Where was I?
Um
Withholding intimacy. Let's go Let's go
back to this. Okay, so
Bismillah.
Bismillah Rahman Rahim.
So, um so the So, when I say uh that
this is something that people are going
through, you will see that obviously in
there is no space in which it is
acceptable for either partner to
withhold from the other. But what we're
seeing is, you know, it's like
it's it's a thing. Weaponizing intimacy
is a thing. Uh May Allah guide us. I
mean,
I don't know why
to you, Naima, now.
Um
I know I'm taking up a lot of your time.
I'm I'm not going to take too much of
your time. I know you're very busy, but
I wanted to ask.
Now,
the issues that we're facing a lot with
with like the females. I've heard you
speak about this before. I want you to
kind of articulate it
the way you have heard you said it
before.
Um the
the issues relating to like how
some sisters can perceive what men do as
always oppressive.
Mhm. Mhm. Why? By virtue of this
feminist kind of second wave narrative,
which is that man is the oppressor by
domination because he is he is in power
over the woman, the hierarchy the
managerial hierarchy that is set in
place by Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala, the
qawamah, all these concepts, they are
themselves oppressive. So, if you
if you so much as enact them, then you
are the agent of oppression.
How do you combat this? How do you talk
to talk to this?
You know, subhanallah, um
for me,
the answer for me, and I could be wrong,
but whenever these questions come up,
I feel the answer I I I believe that the
answer is always found in the seerah.
Mhm. And why I [clears throat] say this
is because the seerah was the lived
example, right? That was the lived
experience of our deen. That's how
people actually applied it, right? So,
you know,
what we know from the seerah is balance.
Mhm.
However, what we need to be careful
and everybody needs to be aware of the
fact that we live in a cultural context,
okay? And that cultural context,
wherever you are in the world, whichever
era you live in, it impacts the way you
view things. Mhm. So, in the 1950s, for
example,
Islamic values were pretty much in line
with society's values. Traditional
gender roles, man's the head of the
household, you know, when daddy comes
home, you know, he comes and deals with
the problems, he goes out to work, mom
stays home with the children.
Muslims would not have been strange at
that time, okay? Because the society was
pretty much based on that.
Fast forward to the '70s now, Muslims
are starting to look a bit
old-fashioned, starting to look a bit
out of touch.
Fast forward to today and our sense of
what is balance
has shifted dramatically, let's put it
that way. So, those of us who are
especially younger,
you know, we're trying to make sense of
everything. We're trying to make sense
of our identity, trying to make sense of
who we are as individuals, what you
know, what does our Islam mean to us,
you know, how much of you know, which of
our identities takes precedence and all
of these things cuz those are the
questions that young people are asking
now because of the society that we live
in. And so, what we may see as fair,
what we may see as balanced, what we may
see as just
may not be what Allah sees as fair and
balanced and just. We we have to be
aware of the fact that we live in a
paradigm, okay? We are in a context. And
a lot of people I find a lot of us think
that
our views are our own,
you know? They come from ourselves. You
know, people say, "Oh, my truth. I'm
speaking my truth. This is this is how I
see things, right?" Not understanding
that your opinion or your ideas and your
feelings, etc., they aren't they didn't
they're not created in a vacuum.
They're not something that sprung up
from a well within. It is a combination
of what you learned growing up, what
your parents taught you, what you
learned in school, what books you read,
what films you watch, what music you
listen to, the friends you have, the
social media you're on. All of that is
impacting you all the time. And that's
your paradigm. So, I digress.
When we look at the we call it a
managerial hierarchy and we look at the
Prophet I would love to go back to the
example of the Prophet because you know,
we're having this conversation about
masculinity. We're having these
conversations about alpha and beta and
dominance and all of this kind of thing.
And what we see really without any bias
when we look at the seerah, we see a man
who was holistically masculine because
we know that every one of us has got
masculine and feminine tendencies inside
us anyway, right? We have the we have
those energies. When you see the Prophet
and how he was able to be strong and
decisive and dominant and and and and
have a goal and go after it and fight
and order for people to be punished and
all of these alpha traits, right?
Because that's what alpha is
how we're seeing it now.
Strong, dominant, etc. Masculine.
He also had the
flip side of masculinity, which is the
ability to be humble,
to be protective, to make people feel
safe, to make people feel like you know,
grounded
because that's the beta side of the
male. It's not an alpha good, beta bad.
That's just ridiculous. It's just that
you have the ability to be both, right?
And the Prophet
when you see him with his family, he had
a balance of both. We've got stories of
him laying down the law and we've got
stories of him completely giving up his
right and it didn't mean anything. We we
I don't have to go into the stories in
the seerah cuz I think we all know what
I'm talking about. And so, when we look
at the ideal at the ideal that we are
aiming for, especially brothers, I want
to speak to brothers on this point. I
also want to speak to sisters because
sisters, you want to be married to a
brother hopefully, maybe you are married
to a brother and hopefully you're
raising future husbands. So, being able
to appreciate that a real man is one who
is grounded in his belief in Allah
and his sense of mission and purpose.
He is humble before Allah
and his actions are all for Allah.
There's no ego,
right? There's no ego. There's no my way
or the highway because I want it to.
This should not be the way that we
think, right? But that man, he will have
to make decisions. Some of those
decisions, you will not like them, but
that's his hak to make those decisions.
And that man as well is responsible for
making you feel safe and secure and
loved and protected and looked after.
So,
I don't know. I guess the the long story
for me is
if we can go back to that model and
understand it and know what it will take
from us to be able to embody that
standard, we'll be on our way to
something special. At the moment,
everyone's on ego. Everyone's on myself,
what I want, what I like, women and men,
right? Now, that's why we're clashing
because the sisters now they want to
their peace, right? Before it was the
brother wanted his peace and everybody
had to kind of run circles around him.
Now, the sister like, "No, no, no, no, I
also want my peace." And that's partly
why a lot of our marriages are
fracturing because all of a sudden, you
[clears throat] know, there's this
there's this power shift, this this
dynamic that's shifted.
Sometimes the original power dynamic was
not the healthiest dynamic and it wasn't
on Sunnah. It was something else,
something cultural, something whatever.
I was going to say I was going to say
that's really well put. The only thing I
would just kind of like
talk about here or I want to I want to
kind of clarify cuz I
I mean, you know the whole red pill
movement we spoke about me and Ali Dawah
made a video about the MGTOWs and the
red pill and whatever they call
themselves, you know.
And these terms red pill are not the
same thing, but anyway,
they have very similar ideas, you know.
But the red pill have their ideas, MGTOW
have their ideas.
A lot of it is to is is a reaction to
feminism in my view. Anyway,
whatever it may be, the the terms alpha
and beta, the reason why I personally
don't use them or don't subscribe to
them
is because so what they because there is
a connotation just like with the
patriarchy, you know? I don't accept the
term patriarchy.
The reason why I don't accept the term
patriarchy like some men use the term in
a positive sense. They're trying to
re-own the word or something like that.
The word patriarchy has [clears throat]
historically and in the literature so
always connoted at least if not
sometimes even been defined as
a systematic oppression of woman by men
or through domination or power
structures and all of that. Now, if I'm
if I'm affirming something which is
known in the in the culture to be
oppressive, then I'm not doing a favor
to
the model of Islam which I'm trying to
to to to espouse. Likewise, the word
beta here,
it has We're not reclaiming the word
beta? No.
I don't want to reclaim any because it's
already been it's already been
distorted
Yeah,
beta is is even though they don't maybe
define it. They don't have any books or
very limited academic works on these
kind of things. It's all what's in on
social media now. It's kind of like a
social media thing.
It's being used in a pejorative sense.
It's being used in a weak say he's a
beta.
And this this is a beta. Go on the Joe
Rogan experience of the beta male and
laughing at him. Yeah, yeah. Sure. No,
that's true. Did you know what I mean?
So so what what it is is that the way
it's I love So, can I just say sorry
just before we go further? Just for
anybody who who who's listening to this
and watching it, please do not go and
tell people sister Naima called the
Prophet Muhammad a beta male, okay?
[laughter]
I can I know that you I know that you
you are very careful
in your articulation and definitely she
didn't say that.
That would be lying about you anyway,
don't worry. You didn't say that. But
what I was going to say was the
qualities that are like compassion, for
example, compassion.
Compassion is associated with what?
Maybe beta? But this is something which
is for us seen as Allah is Ar-Rahman.
What is he a beta?
But that's what I'm saying. You're using
the beta as an insult.
You're using the beta as an insult.
That is the problem because the beta
Yeah, go on. Another one is is
leadership.
And this whole thing of alpha alpha, one
of the things that I'm always seeing on
these social media things is alpha male
is a leader.
Our religion doesn't tell us to go and
opt to be leaders.
Honestly, it does not tell us to go and
want to be leaders. Our religion places
more emphasis on obedience than anything
else, not just for women, but for men as
well.
And not obedience to not obedience to
just the Allah
that there's no obedience to the
creation and the disobedience to the
creator,
but also obedience to the creation.
There's very harsh hadiths.
You have to be strong with the
You have to obey the There are hadiths
like that in the deen. And
so, what is it telling us? There's only
one ayah in the Quran, only one that I
can think of which is a dua to be a
leader which is
The one verse
one time we are we're kind of
incentivized if at all incentivized to
be leaders is where Allah is pushing us
to make a dua where we don't get it from
our own nafs because being a leader is
being arrogant. It's it's what you want
to be a leader why? So you can assert
yourself? So you can be dominant? Do you
want to be dominant? Allah is
We're trying to like we're trying to do
We're trying to make Allah's kalam
dominant, not ourselves dominant.
So in fact, men
whoever humbles himself to Allah, Allah
raises him. So this idea of what leaders
and this and that,
usually those people who are most hungry
to be leaders are the worst leaders
anyway.
You know, the ones who are good leaders,
they never think of themselves as good
leaders. People push them to that
position. They never opt for that
position themselves. So this idea of
what's alpha is connected with the
leader,
this is un-Islamic actually. You should
Hold on. Hold on. I'm going to push back
on that. I'm going to push back on that.
You should not Let me let me clarify
clarify before you push back. What I
mean is you should not desire
leadership.
You can be a good leader, but you don't
need to desire it. Desiring it is
problematic because it it is a form of I
want to impose myself on other people.
Our deen is not about power like that.
Our deen is about we just Okay, that's
that's the Yeah, that's the point that I
want to get to because I think that you
know, even in you know, certain
discourses, right? The issue of of
you know, male dominance, etc.
Patriarchy, etc. Everything is about
power, right?
And
when we look at leadership
in the deen, looking at the shepherd,
for example, every one of you is a
shepherd of their flock and you'll be
questioned about them. What does that
mean? It's not leading to dominate. It's
leading to take responsibility.
So, every man is the emir of his
household. He leads the household
because he takes responsibility. And by
the Hadith it
Exactly. It It did Yeah, it's you know,
everyone has Every one of us is a
shepherd, right? So, I mean I I I
personally I would love to see more of
our brothers developing themselves to be
the very best that they can be and
leading their families. Because even
though we have a big
you know, very loud maybe minority
complaining about toxic masculinity, we
have also a very vocal I would even say
majority of sisters saying where are the
men?
Where are the men who know how to be
men? What does that mean as far as
they're concerned? Who can take care of
the household, who can lead us, who can
protect us, who will bust his his his
backside to make sure that we have what
we need because sisters are overworked
right now. And sisters have been
overworked for a while and again again,
it's all anecdotal.
But when you hear about sisters whose
husbands he could even be present, but
she's she's doing everything. She's you
know, getting money for the kids, is her
house, she's working as well, you know,
the money's coming from the government
and he's not really kind of bringing
anything to the table etc. These issues
a lot of those sisters that I said I
just wish he would grow up. I just wish
that he would man up and I I know it's
it's not like it's not politically
correct to tell a man to man up, but
this is this is what women need. We do
need men who see themselves in that role
as I'm responsible for this flock and
it's my responsibility to myself to
optimize myself in every way that I can
so that I can do right by these this
amana that Allah has given me. So, I
think if you were to see more brothers
stepping up and deciding to work on
themselves deen emotionally getting you
know, in mental health issues out of the
way physically you know, getting healthy
you know, finding ways to to kind of
maximize their income and the impact
they have in the community, you would
find a lot more sisters who are happy to
let them lead and happy to relax into
their feminine role and it wouldn't be
this type of fight, but I could be
wrong.
No, no, I appreciate all of that and I
and I think you've articulated it very
well, but I think there's one thing
which is conspicuously missing in the
articulation.
Which is that we you've mentioned
health, you mentioned mental health and
you mentioned
you've mentioned finances, but the
the one thing which is the deen actually
hierarchizes
is not any of those things, but is is
religiosity. I did mention spiritually
at the beginning it was the first thing
I said actually I did.
Okay, let me be more clear about this,
right? So, Allah
he mentions in
he mentions Yarfa Allah alladhina amanu
minkum walladhina utul ilma darajat.
That Allah in terms of hierarchies
that Allah
he raises amongst you those who believed
among you and those who have been given
ilm knowledge in darajat.
This knowledge Islamic knowledge
may yurid Allahu bihi khairan yufaqqihhu
fid-deen. As you know the Hadith very
famous, whoever wants good Allah who
wants good for them, Allah he gives them
knowledge of the religion or
understanding of the religion even,
yeah.
Now the the thing is like when men are
looking for women to get married to or
women are looking to men, this whole red
pill community what do they favor? Oh,
she's got to look like this, she's got
to be like eight out of 10. Not saying
that
a good looking woman is not important.
I'm not saying a
a rich husband is not is not good to
have, but what I'm saying is that when
the Prophet Muhammad said tunkahu
al-mar'atu li arba'a that the woman is
married for four things li jamaliha wa
li ahliha you know, wa li maliha wa li
diniha wa nifazfar bidhati ad-deen and
he mentioned her beauty and her her
family and he and
wealth, but he says but fazfar bidhati
ad-deen, but be successful with the one
who is religious. Now, why is this
important? Because you know, An-Nawawi
he mentions in sharh of this Hadith in
Sahih Muslim, he says it when when the
Prophet Muhammad said tunkahu al-mar'atu
al-mar'a
li arba'a
he he said it's not sigatul amr meaning
it's not he's not saying you should
marry a woman for four things.
He's saying that these are the four
reasons
uh these are the four things that women
are married for. But and the Prophet
said, okay, these are important he
didn't say like you know, go for the one
who's most beautiful who's eight out of
10 or nine out of 10. He didn't say go
with the one who's got the most money.
He says go with the one who's most
religious.
Now, the same thing applies for the
woman like you can have someone who
doesn't have as much money, who might be
in a council property, who might be
whatever, but he's he's a man of piety,
he's known in the community. Do you know
what I'm trying to say? He's he's
memorized the Quran, he's done this,
he's done that. That person okay, is
higher if if his is in place
in the hierarchy that Allah has put for
him. Yarfa Allah alladhina amanu minkum
alladhina utul ilma darajat. So, I think
a lot of these discourse get colored
with
a capitalistic lens and we have to
really be careful because this is not
our
it's like feminism it creeps in, but we
have to remember what is the hierarchy.
The Prophet Muhammad he mentions in
Hadith
um he mentioned
ad-dunya mal'unah wa mal'un ma fiha
illa dhikrullahi wa alimun wa muta'allim
that the whole dunya is cursed and
everything inside of it is cursed except
for the remembrance of Allah and someone
who is a teacher who knows and who's a
teacher and someone who's learning. So,
there's three there's three things you
want in your life. Dhikr of Allah
and you want to teach the deen which is
the most important thing even though
other knowledges are important as well
because the Prophet told us to make dua
Allahumma inni as'aluka ilman nafi'an wa
rizqan tayyiban wa 'amalan mutaqabbalan.
Ilman nafi'an here is any beneficial
knowledge.
But
but you know, so this is a thing that
sometimes in these discourse we're
talking about men need to be men.
What do do we mean that they need to
start studying the religion by that? Do
we mean that they need to start going to
pray to pray five times a day by that?
Wake up for Fajr by that? Do we mean
that when the Quran says minal mu'minina
rijal
you know, and then
from the the
the mu'mins are rijal or sorry the other
which which is
you
yuriduna
which refers which which links
masculinity with with cleanliness.
What's what's that link?
What what's that got to do with alpha
and beta? Sorry, nothing to If you go in
the Quran and just forget about the
sunnah sorry to say, but just go to the
Quran
and look at what this 23 or 24 instances
where the word rajul rajulan is
mentioned or
rijal are mentioned. Anytime
the word man is mentioned, look at what
it's connected to. It's connected to
iman.
It's connected to nazafah cleanliness.
It's connected to qawamah mas'uliyyah
and protection
maintenance like what you've said. But
what we what we do
sometimes we just focus on that one
thing which is mas'uliyyah and
protection qawamah and we forget about
all the rest.
You know what? Can I just say I I hear
you and I and I agree with you given you
know, expanded my thinking on it as well
masha Allah.
But I I think
I don't know what it's like now because
I think that the
the landscape has changed so [snorts]
much from when we were kind of coming up
because when we were coming up it was
very clear who was on deen and who
wasn't.
Sisters got hijab, you were safe to make
certain assumptions.
Making yourself out to be like a old the
woman sister like what you're wearing
today.
Yes, I am. No, no, no. I'm I told you
I'm an OG. I'm an OG.
No, I'm an OG now. Alhamdulillah. But if
a
[laughter]
if a sister wore hijab and she wore
abaya
it was safe to make certain assumptions
about her lifestyle, about her values,
about the kind of marriage she was
looking for. Similarly, if a brother had
a beard and a thobe and he went to pray
at the masjid, it was safe to make
certain assumptions about what he
expected in a marriage the role he was
going to play, his lifestyle etc. My
friend, those days are gone.
Those days are gone. Those days are gone
because we are such a mix of the
elements right now. You've got sisters
in hijab in the club.
You've got brothers in thobe selling
drugs. You know,
you've got you know, this one here with
the pornography addiction. You've got
that one over there who's kind of you
know, messing about with girls. It's
it's completely it it's no longer black
and white. So, and I think as well
people experienced this idea of marrying
only for deen and let's be fair, it's
the appearance isn't it of deen and
that's the danger because a lot of
people did have the appearance of deen
meanwhile they've got mental health
issues, meanwhile they've got anger
management issues, meanwhile she she's
you know, she's angry with the kids and
she beats them when she doesn't look
after the house.
Stuff happening, yeah? So, I agree with
you the deen should be a priority,
however
there is a danger of us becoming kind of
fooled by people's exteriors. It's not
that simple anymore because as I said,
even though the Muslims that you see now
if you bring a whole group of practicing
Muslims together who all don't all go to
the same places, you'll find that their
virgin their their views on things are
different, their lifestyles are
different, there's certain things they
consider to be just fine, certain things
that I want to marry like this, I want
to marry like that. So, it's not so
simple anymore
and I think that people need to be
really honest with themselves and
realize that the appearance of deen on
somebody's external is not all there is
to know about that person. You do need
to do your due diligence, you need to
peel back the layers and we need to be
honest with ourselves.
That's that's what we need to to we have
to have the deen as a standard, yes. All
I'm saying is we're not in a place
anymore where you can say she looks
religious, I'll marry her. Oh, no, you
can't do that. He looks religious masha
Allah. I've Do you know how many times
I've heard had sisters marrying brothers
who have mental health issues. Yeah,
bipolar, schizophrenia, anger
management, whatever. But what did they
say at the masjid? Mashallah is a good
brother. Mashallah is a good brother.
He's always in the masjid praying. What
does that mean?
What does that mean?
You If you don't know him beyond he sits
in the dark. I'm sorry. I can't accept
just that as a witness. I have to get a
bit more information than that, you
know? And same with the sister. The
sisters are crazy out there. Sisters who
literally have mental health issues and
they mashallah wrap up really nicely,
covered in hijab, everything mashallah.
Sister, salaam alaikum, everything,
everything. You marry that sister you
find that she's actually crazy. So,
that's all I'm saying. It's it's not as
simple as that anymore.
Stuff out there. That's why I said,
protecting the family unit
by making sure that we are all healing
firstly and that's that's big because so
many of us are carrying traumas and and
it's not like our parents' generation.
You know, I had this conversation with
Fatima Barkatullah in IlmFeed podcast
and I talked about our parents and our
grandparents. Their lives were much
harder than ours, right? Much harder.
I'm sure your grandparents had had, you
know, they may have gone through some
wars, you know, the immigration, the
racism, the you know, poverty, living on
the streets, all this kind of thing. But
when you ask them about it, it's a long
gone memory. They don't even remember it
and they certainly don't say I was
scarred for life. Like I I I I've never
gotten over it. They're just like, it
was life. That's what happened. That's
what it
you know what it is, Naima, on this
point. Do you know Do you know like a
lot of today's conversation Sorry to cut
you off. Please remember where you
stopped, yeah?
A lot A lot of what you said today, you
mentioned like key term we talked about
the patriarchy and how it can be
misappropriated or it can be misused and
or if it is used it has some negative
connotation. We talked about alpha, beta
on the other flip side. But this term
trauma, which has become almost a
buzzword now as well. I feel like that
itself can be
It can it reinforce the bad memory. Like
I have traumas and
Like the lexicon has changed to the
extent where lexicon has changed.
There's trauma.
There's triggered. Yeah, triggers,
trauma. Yeah, exactly. And what that
does is it just it's kind of like if
anything sometimes it can have a
negative it can have it can have an
adverse effect because it's just like
like you said all my all my grandparents
are are gone now, but when I was when I
was speaking to them when they were
alive or even my parents, you know, they
they don't speak in that language. That
language is unusual That is unusual
language because
the presupposition is almost that we
shouldn't be It's like we're entitled to
a life without trial. That's the
presupposition.
world problems. Yeah. Yeah.
First first world No, but even first
world problems like people in the first
world think that they shouldn't be
trialed. Like The
Quran says Do you think people think
that they will just be left alone to say
we believe and they will not be trialed?
Uh, you know?
And the reality is like that, you know,
the trials of this life are for
everyone, you know? Every one of us, not
just the believers, disbelievers, Muslim
men, women, young, old, everybody.
Everyone's going to get a piece
Ibnul Qayyim says in his book Shifa'ul
Aleel
is a very good book. Some of it has been
translated.
It's one of the best books you can
probably read on these matters and he
was talking about like
the dunya [clears throat] and the trials
and stuff and he was he was he was
basically describing the dunya as
a combination of heaven and hell.
Basically. If you
He didn't
put it in that language. Like I am
paraphrasing, okay? But if you put
heaven and hell together you have the
dunya. If you want to put it, you know.
I like that. That that make that yeah, I
like that.
what I mean? It's There's a reason why
There's a reason why there's a bit of
hell and a bit of heaven in this dunya.
It's like Allah didn't give us either
or. He gave us both because it's it's
the place it's the testing ground
for the graduation to take place and it
will test it will see you the true
colors He was talking about certain
things happen which expose people's true
colors. Yeah. This dunya is the is the
biggest thing that happens which expose
all of our spiritual true colors. And
the day of judgment is what's going to
put us is where that the results of of
of that's going to be manifest. 100%. I
mean, I think, you know, this this issue
of and again, this is why I keep talking
about the cultural context that we live
in because it does affect us, you know?
We can't None of us can say very few of
us and I think only those few are the
ones who are steeped in Islamic
knowledge and that's a tiny minority of
us. Majority of us
Yeah, just me and my friends actually
now.
[laughter]
You heard it here first.
Halal.
Um steeped in Islamic knowledge
and the your Islamic knowledge informs
your thinking. It your your Islamic
knowledge is actually the thing that is
your thinking is rooted in that.
The It's a tiny handful of people in the
world. Yeah, because because you read
Quran doesn't mean that your thinking is
like rooted in Islam. It's not the case.
But what my point is that
even you know, and I I've been
transparent about this, you know, at the
end of the day I'm not a scholar. I'm
just a person. Um and you know, for
example, the hierarchy of needs, I
always talk about Maslow's hierarchy of
needs. Yeah, yeah, Maslow's hierarchy.
Yeah, I mean, we're just trying our
best. But Maslow's hierarchy of needs I
find is very very
very instructive. And I know I've had
pushback on that cuz people have said
that's not our hierarchy of needs. We
have a different hierarchy.
No, I just to explain to the viewers
just because this might be something
they don't know. It's it's basically a
triangular structure at the bottom of
which is like, you know, you have your
basic needs like shelter, food, drink,
whatever. And at the top of the pinnacle
of this triangular structure is
something called self-actualization. And
according to Maslow, people like
Einstein would have
have have achieved this
self-actualization. People like, I don't
know, choose whoever you want, fill in
the blank, you know. Successful
so-called successful people.
basically. [clears throat]
The goats. Like the goats in whatever.
But it's it's good like you said it is
instructive. I think that's a good way
to put it. It is definitely instructive
because it gives us something to to opt
for. I mean, the Quran the Islam, sorry,
the Quran is in the Hadith where the
Prophet has his own triangular
structure which is wal Islam and then
the five pillars, wal Iman and then the
six pillars.
Wal Ihsan and
Ihsan is at the top of it. Like, you
know, we've got our own one. But
certainly Maslow's one is instructive as
well, yeah.
Keep going, Naima.
interesting to me So, what's interesting
to me with this hierarchy of needs
at the bottom is basic needs. Food,
shelter, uh, you know, food, drink,
shelter I think it is.
I think intimacy is in there. Sex is
there.
Next up from that is emotional needs, I
believe. Mhm. Uh, and then it's sort of
I think it's not professional but it's
like mission and then
self-actualization. I'm I'm completely
butchering this. I'm completely
butchering this. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Guys,
go and Google it, please. It's there for
everyone to see.
But my point is this is that
my observation is that when the lower
people are on the hierarchy of needs, as
in if you're still at basic needs level,
it's very easy to be satisfied because
all you need is your basic needs to be
met.
Once you have transcended basic needs
and you start to go into higher
pursuits,
the higher you go and the higher you aim
on that triangle, the more likely you
are to be frustrated and disappointed
because not everybody reaches the top of
that triangle. Some people stay on the
basic level. Some people will go up to
having their emotional needs met. But
there are children even today who don't
get their emotional needs met. We know
this. Okay, maybe they have a home.
Maybe their parents feed them. They make
sure they go to school. But their
emotional needs are not being met. Maybe
the parents don't know how to do it.
Maybe the parents themselves never had
their emotional needs met. Whatever the
case may be. Anyway, I digress.
My point is
we need to be careful because we're
living in a world where that bottom is
done. First world problems means that
we're always looking at
self-actualization. We're looking at,
you know, me you know, kind of finding
myself and and and becoming the better
version of myself and and and and and
and and usually not in a religious way
but in other ways, right?
Yeah. I think my concern for my
community
is that we aim so high that we firstly
neglect to be grateful for what we have
and we also are not able to be
satisfied. So, we are constantly chasing
the dragon. And that means that we're
always in this perpetual state of
chasing after the dunya cuz that's what
it is. It's chasing dunya. And that
dunya could be the relationship. It
could be money. It could be you know, a
certain lifestyle. It could be academic
pursuits. Whatever it is, right? But I
just want us to be circumspect, I think,
and try to have a balanced approach to
it because even in relationships we're
seeing it. You know, people expect more
from their relationships now than they
did 20 years ago, even Muslims. And I
think that is one of the other reasons
that is driving high divorce rates in
the community because one partner has a
higher expectation for the relationship
than the other. And the other one is
perfectly satisfied. Listen.
We're together.
You cook for me.
I've got wonderful kids.
Alhamdulillah, I'm happy. I'm good.
She is like, we don't do date nights.
You never listen to me.
You don't really see me. I feel like you
don't appreciate me. I want more.
I want a best friend. I want a
companion. I want all new things, yeah?
These are new things because when they
first got together this was not the
conversation. When they first got
together it was bismillah, for the sake
of Allah, you're going to give me your
rights you're going to give me my
rights. I'm going to give you your
rights. It's easy, yeah? Because
remember back in the day that's what
everybody thought. A successful marriage
is what? Two people get married for the
sake of Allah. They fulfill each other's
rights happily ever after. That's what
people thought.
But the more we want and the more we
demand from our partners. And I'm going
to switch this because I don't want to
be accused of bias.
Let me switch it. Now say it. Say it.
Say it. Say it. We want to hear that. We
want to hear the female problems as
well. Yeah, yeah, I'm going to say it.
So the sister is No, this is not the
This is the husband's problem cuz the
sister's problem a lot of the time is
you know, she has a vision for her life
and a vision for her relationship, but
her husband doesn't meet her there
anymore. Like maybe her vision was here
before. Once she starts to elevate that
vision, he's not following her. He's
like, "What are you doing all that for?
Like you're doing too much. Just relax.
We're good." And she's like, "But I want
this and I need that." And her needs are
changing. She's She's evolving. She's
becoming a different person. So that has
caused a lot of friction and I I've seen
this more and more in the community,
right? So that's that.
Flip side,
sister's like, "Alhamdulillah, I've got
my husband. I've got my kids. You know,
we don't have all the money in the
world, but we're happy. Yeah? And I'm
I'm I'm I'm happy with where we're at."
Meanwhile, the husband's like, "You put
on weight, you know?" And he's thinking
of, you know, like "How could my life
Maybe he likes that. Maybe Maybe he
doesn't know that yet.
no, we're we're flipping it. We're
flipping it, remember? So for him, he's
thinking I I'm this person. I should
have this type of life. A lot of our
brothers, unfortunately, are you know,
not a lot No, I'm going to say a lot of
our brothers, porn addiction is a thing.
"My wife doesn't do what those women do.
This is a problem for me."